[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello, and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Throughout recorded
history, human society
has been haunted by reports
of unidentified flying
objects in our
skies, many of which
have defied all attempts
at scientific explanation
or understanding.
What are these phenomenon?
And how can they be explained?
With me today is
Terrence McKenna,
a philosopher and
thinker of note
in the area of altered states
of consciousness and alternative
realities.
Terrence is the co-author
with his brother Dennis
of "The Invisible Landscape,"
and also "Psilocybin, The Magic
Mushroom Growers Guide."
He is a founding member
of Botanical Dimensions,
a non-profit
organization devoted
to preserving and studying
psychoactive plants used
by native cultures
throughout the world.
And he is also the developer
of a computer software package
called Timewave Zero, designed
to augment interpretation
of the ancient Chinese book
of prophecy the "I Ching."
Welcome, Terrence.
>> It's a pleasure
to be here with you.
>> It's a pleasure to have
you here with me also.
You know, the UFO
phenomenon is striking
because it's so bizarre.
It seems as if the reports
that come in about UFOs
defy any attempt whatsoever
to categorize them.
I guess from my point
of view, I can only
assume that there are probably
many different interpretations
of this event.
I think given your background
as a student of shamanism
and altered states of
consciousness and alternative
realities, you have some
unique perspectives on the UFO
phenomenon.
I wonder if we could
get into that material.
>> Yes, well, the ordinary
approach to the UFOs has been
to view them as visitors or
intruders from a nearby star
system that have come in metal
ships for reasons of trade
or scientific investigation
or military conquest.
>> Or missionary activity.
>> Or mission activity to
the vicinity of our planet.
And this was a myth that
sprang up but concomitant
with the modern wave of
sightings that began shortly
after World War II.
As time has passed and
the number of sightings
have gone from
hundreds to thousands
to hundreds of thousands of
instances, as the myth has
fleshed itself out
with sub-themes,
the theme of abduction, the
theme of telepathic contact,
it's become much more difficult
to fit all the known facts
into the simple model
of space faring visitors
from another world.
So what we are left
with then are a number
of more exotic
competing theories
in the so-called
post-modern phase
of thinking about the UFO.
Probably the best known of
these alternative explanations
was the one pioneered by
the Swiss psychologist
Carl Jung, who in 1953
wrote a book called
"Flying Saucers, A Modern Myth
of Things Seen in the Sky."
And Jung was at great pains,
without passing judgment
on the reality of the source of
things seen, to interpret them
psychologically,
to interpret them
as one would interpret a dream.
And he saw in their
circular form,
in their scintillating,
shining, alchemical brilliance
a symbol of human
wholeness and felt
that they were a symbol of our
collective yearning for a kind
of totality and individuation.
Now, in a way, this kind of
explanation is very satisfying.
However, it is not satisfying to
the person who has immediately
undergone a very strange and a
very real seeming experience.
>> Unless such a person were
told they're great messages
of hope for the planet.
>> Well, and this is a
persistent part of the flying
saucer phenomenon, that people
who have close contact with
the saucers return with messages
of universal brotherhood
and benevolence with stories
of a beneficent hegemony
of organized
intelligence, where wiser,
older worlds and civilizations
help younger and less mature
worlds toward a kind of
galactic citizenship.
However--
>> That's just one
thread of the evidence.
>> It's one thread
of the evidence.
And it isn't really well
supported by the evidence.
Jacques Vallee, who is one
of the foremost commentators
on the phenomenon, has
been at great pains
to point out that with the
flying saucer phenomenon,
we're dealing with thousands and
thousands of incidents per year
throughout the world.
It's very hard-- with even
at our own primitive level
of scientific sophistication,
we can learn a great deal
about a plan that by sending
a single probe to that planet.
What kind of scientific
program of investigation
requires thousands and
thousands of appearances?
And if we make the assumption
that not all appearances are
observed, but that in fact only
a small number are observed,
then the number of appearances
that must actually be going on
soars toward an
astronomical number.
It suggests we're dealing
with an inner penetration
by an alien dimension on
an almost industrial scale.
>> Of course, a single
probe could cause thousands
of appearances.
>> If it were of a sophisticated
enough nature, that's right.
The approach that I have
taken that has characterized
my work with this phenomenon
was, first of all,
to say we have not carried out
a sufficiently in-depth survey
of the life already
on this planet
to be able to say that at
some time in the past life
did not arrive here and
thrive here that is not part
of the general heritage
of life on this planet,
but that is somehow come
in from the outside.
My candidate for that kind of
an intrusive extraterrestrial
would be probably a
mushroom of some sort
or a spore-bearing life
form, because spores
are very impervious
to low temperatures
and high radiation,
the kind of environment
met with in outer space.
>> In other words, a mushroom
spore could conceivably even
waft itself up through the
atmosphere of our planet
and enter into empty space.
>> Oh, there's no question
but what this is happening,
that through what's
called Brownian motion,
which is sort of
random percolation,
spores do reach the outer
edge of our atmosphere.
And there, in the presence
of cosmic rays and meteors
and rare, highly
energetic events,
occasionally, a very
small percentage
of these biological objects
are wafted into space.
We even possess meteorites
that are believed
to be pieces of the
Martian surface thrown out
by impacts on the Martian
surface of asteroidal material.
In fact, I think part of the
grappling with the UFO mystery
is going to lead
to the conclusion
that space is not an impermeable
and insurmountable barrier
to biology.
That, in fact,
planets are islands,
and life does occasionally
wash in from distant places
and if conditions are
correct can take hold.
However, let me say in the
UFO phenomenon, we are dealing
or we presuppose
that we are dealing
not simply with the phenomenon
of extraterrestrial biology,
but with the phenomenon of
extraterrestrial intelligence.
And this is a hackle-raising
raising notion--
>> We're dealing with
more than mushroom spores.
more than mushroom spores,
at least as
ordinarily conceived.
And I think the thing
that has been overlooked
in almost all discussions
of extraterrestrial contact
is how strange the
extraterrestrial is
likely to be.
It isn't going to be a
friendly, elfin little feller
with a beating heart of gold.
It isn't even going to be
some of the more extravagantly
grotesque creations out
of Hollywood conditions
and time spans in the universe
are long enough and varied
enough that I would
bet that the real task
with extraterrestrial
intelligence
will be to recognize
it, you see.
We have no conception of
how species-bound our images
of life and biology are.
This is a place
where we have never
been asked to confront to what
degree the monkey within us
is channeled our
expectations and perceptions.
>> Well, it is the case that on
this planet virtually all known
life forms are based on
the same DNA molecule.
>> Well, except that have all
life forms been examined to see
to what degree they deviate
percentage-wise from,
let's say, a stranded
DNA molecule?
The answer is no.
The sequencing of DNA is
a very expensive process.
And it's only carried out
on laboratory organisms
with an extensive
history of involvement
in medical research, like E coli
or the ordinary laboratory rat.
No, there's a great deal we
don't know about life on Earth.
We don't know when
the fungi entered
into the evolutionary chain.
We don't know what kind
of intelligence is really
possessed by the cephalopods,
the shell-less mollusks that
include the octopi--
the intelligence of
dolphins has been
studied by Lilly and others--
the intelligence of the large
primates other than man.
One way of looking at nature is
that it is entirely linguistic
intent, that DNA is, in
fact, a way of uttering
protein syntactical
structures into matter.
>> In other words, all
of nature is like a poem.
>> Yes, nature is a
communicating system of some
sort.
And the problem that
we have is to transcend
cultural languages,
historically created languages
with very limited
applications, and instead
fall into phase with the
communication systems
that nature has
placed all around us.
One possible view
of the flying saucer
is that it is a
kind of projection
from the consciousness
of the planet,
that it is Gaia,
that it is, in fact,
a kind of alchemical object
haunting human historical time
with a symbol of totality,
the kind of totality
that our religions and
our mystical yearnings
are so at pains to
concretize for us.
But unless we as
egocentric beings
clarify our relationship
to the unconscious,
then I think the
flying saucer is
going to remain
quintessentially mysterious.
And this was Jung's view.
>> One of the things that Jung
pointed out in this book is
that we must pay attention
to the research which Dr.
JB Rhine was doing at that
time at Duke University and ESP
and psychoanalysis, and that
even if UFOs had a physical
reality, could be photographed
or could be weighed
and measured, that they
still might in some manner be
projections of the human mind.
>> Oh, yes, this is an
important point to make,
which the flying saucer people
are forever misunderstanding.
And that is saying
that the flying saucer
is a psychic object does
not mean that it is not
a physical object.
Jung in "Mysterium
Coniunctionis"
is at great pains to say
that the realm of the psychic
and the realm of the physical
meet in a strange kind of never
never land that we have yet to
create the intellectual tools
to explore.
This is where the
mystery of synchronicity
is going to come to rest,
the mystery of all kinds
of paranormal activity on
the part of human beings,
and the mystery of
the flying saucer.
It's interesting,
you see, that if you
take the broad world of
the so-called mysteries,
parapsychological, shamanic,
extraterrestrial, so forth,
and hypothesize another
spatial dimension, one
more spatial dimension,
then suddenly,
all these mysteries
become trivial.
They are easily done.
Locked boxes are opened.
Future events are discerned.
Lost objects are found.
This sort of thing becomes
quite the ordinary run of things
if we hypothesize
dimensions hidden
from ordinary experience.
>> And, of course, there's
serious work at this point
in the field of unified field
theory in physics to postulate
other dimensions of space
than we normally think of.
>> That's right.
The current physical
models of the universe
require 11 dimensions,
11 integrated variables
to describe.
And that's physical
models of the universe.
If we then turn our
attention to mind and realize
that having no
definition of what mind
is, why then is there
any mystery in the fact
that we have no definition
of what the UFO is?
The mind is present at hand
in every conscious moment.
It has been our constant
companion for 50,000 years.
And we haven't a clue
as to what it is.
So therefore, a manifestation
of the other, the super ego,
or the extraterrestrial
other, like the UFO,
it is not surprising
that it is a mystery.
I always hark back to
the words of JBS Haldane,
the great British
enzymologist, who
said reality is not only
stranger than we suppose,
it may be stranger
than we can suppose.
>> Well, that suggests to
me that if we look at some
of the most bizarre, most
anomalous cases that we have,
such as UFOs, and we
begin to ask ourselves,
not so much what are they
because that's a mystery,
but what is their function?
How are they affecting us?
That's like holding up
a mirror to ourselves.
And it tells us a great
deal about the basic mystery
of our mind and our reality.
>> Yes, this is the so-called
post-modern approach to ask
the question, not
what is the UFO,
but what is it doing to us?
Jacques Vallee
pioneered this approach.
And the answer is fascinating.
What the UFOs are doing to
us, to global society, is they
are eroding faith in
science, by casting directly
in the path of science a kind
of gauntlet, a challenge,
crack this, almost as though
the cosmic giggle had shown
at to the bachelor party of
science to spoil the bash,
in the same way that the
Resurrection of Christ
posed a tremendous problem
for the intellectuals
of late Roman
antiquity, because they
had no place in their
world view for someone
rising from the dead.
They were Greek materialists,
atomists essentially.
In that same way, the UFO
challenges the assumptions
of science.
And I think in that sense,
Jung was really onto something
when he saw it as coming
from the unconscious.
It is like an object
coming from the unconscious
with a compensatory function to
turn us away from the rational
and toward the intuitive,
to turn us away
from the paternalistic,
Apollonian, solar, masculine
view of things and toward
a kind of watery, lunar,
mysterious, intuitively
felt, feminine force,
almost as though the UFO
is a manifestation of Gaia
as mother goddess.
Science as the proudest,
pardon the word,
erection of the
rational mind then
is challenged by something from
an entirely other dimension,
an entirely other
realm that concretizes
for us the culture crisis.
And that's why I've
gotten into UFO.
I think they are important for
a resolution of the culture
crisis.
They concretize the
struggle between
the paternalistic masculine
and the lunar feminine,
between a dominator society and
the kind of partnership society
that we require to survive.
>> And yet, it seems as if
that challenge is not a direct
confrontation.
As Vallee points out, the
UFO are operating almost
at the mythological
level of our culture.
They're not landing
in the White House.
They're not really challenging
the military or NASA.
>> No, they're very
mercurial, very watery.
When you reach out toward
them, there is nothing there.
What they chiefly have become
is an intellectual force
in human thinking
about the future.
But when you reach out
to grasp the hardware,
to read the message, to meet the
alien, there is nothing there.
I've come to the conclusion,
both from talking to contactees
and having had a contactee
experience, that whatever lies
behind the UFO mystery,
it is a force which
can literally do anything.
So it is fruitless to
talk about the size
of the objects or their
composition or color
or the size of the entities
and their dress and weapons
and accouterments, because
it can appear literally
any way it wants to.
It can appear as
the Virgin Mary.
galactictarian overlords.
It can appear as gnomes, elves,
sprites, this sort of thing.
It is not to be caught
in the rational net.
>> No.
Your description is
strikingly actually parallel
with one exception to the
view of many fundamentalist
Christians who say
this UFO stuff is
all the work of the devil.
>> Well, I don't know about
the work of the devil.
Jung's criticism
of Christianity was
that it had not made the place
for what he called the shadow.
And he said the productions
of Christian culture
will always be neurotic,
because the shadow has not
been included.
So there's a lack
of psychic balance.
Perhaps the UFO carries
compensatory psychic energy
from the realm of the shadow.
Some people are very
frightened of it.
Some people see it as an almost
millenarian salvational hope,
the savior of mankind.
I think that it's very
powerful, that it haunts
time like a ghost, that
the messianic anticipations
of fundamentalist
Christianity and Islam
are, in fact, a picking up on
the shockwave that the image
of the flying saucer
casts backward
through time, that this
image of the new Jerusalem,
four-gated city, descending from
the sky to whisk the elect away
to a better place, is a
kind of prophecy, yearning
toward a fact in
the act of becoming.
You know, Christianity and
Islam are the most history
obsessed of all the
world's major religions--
>> Along with Judaism.
And all three of
them have this notion
of the transcendental
object at the end of time.
And alchemy in the 16th
century was an outbreak
of an expectation of a
transcendental object
in the nearby here and now.
>> The omega point of
history, so to speak.
>> Yes, it would cure all ills,
confer longevity, fertility,
virility, and mortality.
And I think that
the flying saucer
is an airborne philosopher's
stone, the sophic hydrolith
of Paracelsus, haunting
the skies of modern America
with a promise of mandalic
cohesion for the future
that science has not given us.
Science has been a very
sadly disappointing religion
in the realm of the heart.
The flying saucer
comes from the heart,
but it bears the
very strange energy
of the other in
its manifestation
as planetary goddess.
>> I'm often struck by the
psychic powers that seem to be
associated with people who have
had intensive encounters with
UFOs.
>> That's right.
The thing--
>> I've researched many
of these cases myself.
>> It's both material
and psychological.
It anticipates the future.
It seems as the memories
of the contactees
are transparent to this force.
It can reach deep
into their lives
and confront them
with information
taken from forgotten
incidents in their lives.
It is an awesome
kind of force that
transcends space and
time for the individual.
Now, it may be
that we will never
have a general theory
of flying saucers.
It may be that this
is something that
addresses the individual,
in the same way that I
don't think we will ever have
a general theory of falling
in love.
That, too, is something which
addresses the individual.
We have been mistaken to expect
"Time" magazine or "The New
York Times" to explain
the flying saucers to us.
They will not explain
the flying saucers to us
any more than they will
explain ourselves to us.
This is something that haunts
the membrane of experience,
very close in to the
experiencing ego.
And therefore, it
is threatening.
And this is one of
the reasons that I
think it relates to the
psychedelic experience,
because the psychedelic
experience is like a UFO
encounter on demand, where
the will of the person having
the experience enters in.
They decide to have this
curious, symmetry breaking
kind of experience.
What I have tried to
say to the UFO community
is that we will not really have
a deep understanding of what
the contact experience
is until we include data
from the psychedelic
experience as a legitimate data
to be included when
looking at the problem.
>> Well, you have talked
earlier about our need to make
an extensive survey of all of
the biological manifestations
on our planet.
It almost seems that
in order to really get
a handle on UFO
phenomenon, we need
to make a comparable
survey of all
of the psychological
manifestations of which we
are aware.
And it seems to me
that at some level,
you would agree
with me that the UFO
phenomenon is one of our
psychological manifestations.
>> Yes, I agree.
>> We've got about
two minutes left.
So I wonder if we can sort
of summarize your view
in that regard.
>> Yes, I think that the
UFO phenomenon is a modern
manifestation of a phenomenon
which has been with us
for thousands of years.
That is the partial penetration
of our own cultural space
by others--
pixies, elves, fairies,
sprites, demons,
whatever you wish to call them--
>> Angels.
In the past, we had
a professional class
for dealing with
these go betweens.
We called the professional
class shamans.
And they mitigated
these comings and goings
and had a lore and a
mythology about them.
As we have lost contact
with our shamanic roots,
the things which go on at a low
frequency out in the wilderness
and deserts of this
planet have become
to seem like us either like
invasions from another world
or virtual impossibilities.
I think that the flying
saucer is knocking on our door
to remind us of the
depth and strangeness
and animate intelligence
that is resident with us
in nature on this planet.
>> Terrence McKenna, it's been
a very eloquent presentation
and extremely thought provoking.
Thank you very much
for being with me.
>> It's always a pleasure
to talk with you.
>> And thank you very
much for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]